doc/CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to Markup.ml

Markup.ml is developed on [GitHub][repo]. Feel free to open an issue, or send me
an email at [antonbachin@yahoo.com][email]. If you have a strong interest and
would like to join the project as a co-maintainer, it is welcome!

[repo]:    https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml
[email]:   mailto:antonbachin@yahoo.com

<br/>

#### Table of contents

- [Getting started](#getting-started)
- [Building and testing](#building)
- [Code overview](#code-overview)
  - [Common concepts](#common-concepts)
  - [Structure](#structure)



<br/>

<a id="getting-started"></a>
## Getting started

A development version of Markup.ml can be installed in two ways. The easiest is

```
opam source --dev-repo --pin markup
```

The other way is to clone this repo (perhaps after forking it), then execute
`make install` in it. If you go this route, execute `make uninstall` later to
remove the pin.



<br/>

<a id="building"></a>
## Building and testing

To test the code, you need to have package `ounit`. Then, simply run `make test`
to build the library and run unit tests. If you also have `bisect_ppx`
installed, a coverage report will be generated. There are several other kinds of
testing:

- `make performance-test` measures time for Markup.ml to parse some XML and HTML
  files. If you have Ocamlnet and/or Xmlm installed, those libraries will also
  be measured, for comparison.
- `make js-test` checks that `Markup_lwt` can be linked into a `js_of_ocaml`
  program, i.e. that it is not accidentally pulling in any Unix dependencies.
- `make dependency-test` pins and installs Markup.ml using OPAM, then builds
  some small programs that depend on Markup.ml. This tests correct installation
  and that no dependencies are missing. To get the most out of this test, it
  should be done on an OPAM switch that has Lwt but does not have Uutf.

All tests can be run with `make all-tests`. This also generates the
documentation, to make sure that it is not broken.



<br/>

<a id="code-overview"></a>
## Code overview

<a id="common-concepts"></a>
### Common concepts

The library is internally written entirely in continuation-passing style (CPS),
more popularly known simply as *using callbacks*. Except for really trivial
helpers, most internal functions in Markup.ml take two continuations
(callbacks): one to call if the function succeeds, and one to call if it fails
with an exception. So, for a function we would think of as taking as one `int`
argument, and returning a `string`, the type signature would look like this:

```ocaml
val do_something : int -> (exn -> unit) -> (string -> unit) -> unit
```

The code will call it on `1337` as `do_something 1337 throw k`. If
`do_something` succeeds, say with result `"foo"`, it will call `k "foo"`. If it
fails, say with `Exit`, it will call `throw Exit`. Popular names in other
languages for `throw` and `k` are `on_failure` and `on_success`, but this code
was originally written without popular languages in mind :)

The point of all this is that `do_something` doesn't have to return right away:
it can, perhaps transitively, trigger some I/O, and call `throw` or `k` only
later, when the I/O completes.

Due to pervasive use of CPS, there are two useful type aliases defined in
[`Markup_common`][common]:

```ocaml
type 'a cont = 'a -> unit
type 'a cps = exn cont -> 'a cont -> unit
```

With these aliases, the signature of `do_something` can be abbreviated as:

```ocaml
val do_something : int -> string cps
```

which should be much more legible. It might be a [nice easy PR][rename-cps] to
rename alias `'a cont` to `'a callback`.

[rename-cps]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/issues/23

The other important internal type in Markup.ml is the continuation-passing style
stream, or *kstream* (`k` being the traditional meta-variable for a
continuation). The fundamental operation on a stream is getting the next
element, and for kstreams this looks like:

```ocaml
Kstream.next : 'a Kstream.t -> exn cont -> unit cont -> 'a cont -> unit
```

The way this works is that when you call `next stream on_exn on_empty k`, `next`
eventually calls:

- `on_exn exn` if trying to retrieve the next element resulted in exception
  `exn`,
- `on_empty ()` if the stream ended, or
- `k v` in the remaining case, when the stream has a next value, where we are
  calling that value `v`.

Most of Markup.ml is composed as a big chain of stream processors, tied together
by these kstreams. For example, each parser

- takes a stream of bytes,
- transforms it into a stream of Unicode characters paired with locations,
- transforms that into a stream of language tokens, like an "open tag,"
- and transforms that into a stream of parsing signals, like "the start of an
  element."

<br/>

The synchronous default API of Markup.ml, seen in the [`README`][readme], is a
thin wrapper over this internal implementation, which simply expects each call
to a CPS function to call its continuations (callbacks) *before* the function
returns.

Likewise, the Lwt API is another thin wrapper, which translates between CPS and
Lwt promises.

[readme]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml#readme

<br/>

<a id="structure"></a>
### Structure

As for how the stream processors are chained together, The HTML specification
strongly suggests a structure for the parser in the section
[*8.2.1 Overview of the parsing model*][model], from where the following diagram
is ripped without any shame whatsoever:

<p align="center">
<img src="https://www.w3.org/TR/html5/images/parsing-model-overview.svg" />
</p>

[model]: https://www.w3.org/TR/html5/syntax.html#overview-of-the-parsing-model

The XML parser follows the same structure, even though it is not explicitly
suggested by the XML specification.

The modules can be arranged in the following categories. Where a module directly
implements a box from the diagram, it is indicated in boldface.

Until the modules dealing with Lwt, only `Markup_stream_io` does I/O. The rest
of the modules are pure with respect to I/O.

Almost everything is based directly on specifications. Most functions are
commented with the HTML or XML specification section number they are
implementing. It may also be useful to see the [conformance status][conformance]
– these are all the known deviations by Markup.ml from the specifications.

#### Helpers

- [`Markup_common`][common] – shared definitions, compiler compatibility, etc.
- [`Markup_error`][error] – parsing and serialization error type. Markup.ml does
  not throw exceptions, because all errors are recoverable.
- [`Markup.namespace`][namespace] – namespace URI to prefix conversion and back.
- [`Markup_entities`][entities], [`Markup_trie`][trie] – HTML entities and a
  trie for incrementally searching them.
- [`Markup_kstream`][kstream] – above-mentioned CPS streams.
- [`Markup_text`][text] – some utilities for `Markup_html_tokenizer` and
  `Markup_xml_tokenizer`; see below.

#### I/O

- [`Markup_stream_io`][stream_io] – make byte streams from files, strings, etc.,
  write byte streams to strings, etc. – the first stage of parsing and the last
  stage of serialization (**Network** in the diagram). This uses the I/O
  functions in `Pervasives`.

#### Encodings

- [`Markup_encoding`][encoding] – byte streams to Unicode character streams
  (**Byte Stream Decoder** in the diagram). For UTF-8, this is a wrapper around
  `uutf`.
- [`Markup_detect`][detect] – prescans byte streams to detect encodings.
- [`Markup_input`][input] – Unicode streams to "preprocessed" Unicode streams –
  in HTML5 parlance, this just means normalizing CR-LF to CR, and attaching
  locations (**Input Stream Preprocessor** in the diagram).

#### HTML parsing

- [`Markup_html_tokenizer`][html_tokenizer] – preprocessed Unicode streams to
  HTML lexeme streams (**Tokenizer** in the diagram). HTML lexemes are things
  like start tags, end tags, and runs of text.
- [`Markup_html_parser`][html_parser] – HTML lexeme streams to HTML signal
  streams (**Tree Construction** in the diagram). Signal streams are things like
  "start an element," "start another element as its child," "now end the child,"
  "now end the root element." They are basically a left-to-right traversal of a
  DOM tree, without the DOM tree actually being in memory.

#### XML parsing

- [`Markup_xml_tokenizer`][xml_tokenizer] – as for HTML above, but for XML.
- [`Markup_xml_parser`][xml_parser] - as for HTML above, but for XML.

#### HTML writing

- [`Markup_html_writer`][html_writer] – HTML signal streams back to
  UTF-8-encoded byte streams.

#### XML writing

- [`Markup_xml_writer`][xml_writer] - as for HTML above, but for XML.

#### User-friendly APIs

- [`Markup_utility`][utility] – convenience functions on signal streams for the
  user.
- [`Markup`][main], [`Markup_lwt`][lwt], [`Markup_lwt_unix`][lwt_unix] – the
  public interface for operating all of the above machinery without having to
  touch CPS.

[common]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_common.ml
[error]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_error.ml
[namespace]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_namespace.mli
[entities]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_entities.ml
[trie]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_trie.ml
[kstream]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_kstream.mli
[stream_io]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_stream_io.ml
[encoding]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_encoding.ml
[input]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_input.mli
[html_tokenizer]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_html_tokenizer.mli
[html_parser]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_html_parser.mli
[html_writer]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_html_writer.mli
[xml_tokenizer]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_xml_tokenizer.mli
[xml_parser]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup__xml_parser.mli
[xml_writer]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_xml_writer.mli
[text]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_text.ml
[detect]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_detect.mli
[utility]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_utility.ml
[main]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup.mli
[lwt]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_lwt.mli
[lwt_unix]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_lwt_unix.mli
[conformance]: http://aantron.github.io/markup.ml/#2_Conformancestatus

Commit message:

Docs: clarify HTML5 entity list in CONTRIBUTING.md
[skip ci]

doc/CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to Markup.ml

Markup.ml is developed on [GitHub][repo]. Feel free to open an issue, or send me
an email at [antonbachin@yahoo.com][email]. If you have a strong interest and
would like to join the project as a co-maintainer, it is welcome!

[repo]:    https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml
[email]:   mailto:antonbachin@yahoo.com

<br/>

#### Table of contents

- [Getting started](#getting-started)
- [Building and testing](#building)
- [Code overview](#code-overview)
  - [Common concepts](#common-concepts)
  - [Structure](#structure)



<br/>

<a id="getting-started"></a>
## Getting started

A development version of Markup.ml can be installed in two ways. The easiest is

```
opam source --dev-repo --pin markup
```

The other way is to clone this repo (perhaps after forking it), then execute
`make install` in it. If you go this route, execute `make uninstall` later to
remove the pin.



<br/>

<a id="building"></a>
## Building and testing

To test the code, you need to have package `ounit`. Then, simply run `make test`
to build the library and run unit tests. If you also have `bisect_ppx`
installed, a coverage report will be generated. There are several other kinds of
testing:

- `make performance-test` measures time for Markup.ml to parse some XML and HTML
  files. If you have Ocamlnet and/or Xmlm installed, those libraries will also
  be measured, for comparison.
- `make js-test` checks that `Markup_lwt` can be linked into a `js_of_ocaml`
  program, i.e. that it is not accidentally pulling in any Unix dependencies.
- `make dependency-test` pins and installs Markup.ml using OPAM, then builds
  some small programs that depend on Markup.ml. This tests correct installation
  and that no dependencies are missing. To get the most out of this test, it
  should be done on an OPAM switch that has Lwt but does not have Uutf.

All tests can be run with `make all-tests`. This also generates the
documentation, to make sure that it is not broken.



<br/>

<a id="code-overview"></a>
## Code overview

<a id="common-concepts"></a>
### Common concepts

The library is internally written entirely in continuation-passing style (CPS),
more popularly known simply as *using callbacks*. Except for really trivial
helpers, most internal functions in Markup.ml take two continuations
(callbacks): one to call if the function succeeds, and one to call if it fails
with an exception. So, for a function we would think of as taking as one `int`
argument, and returning a `string`, the type signature would look like this:

```ocaml
val do_something : int -> (exn -> unit) -> (string -> unit) -> unit
```

The code will call it on `1337` as `do_something 1337 throw k`. If
`do_something` succeeds, say with result `"foo"`, it will call `k "foo"`. If it
fails, say with `Exit`, it will call `throw Exit`. Popular names in other
languages for `throw` and `k` are `on_failure` and `on_success`, but this code
was originally written without popular languages in mind :)

The point of all this is that `do_something` doesn't have to return right away:
it can, perhaps transitively, trigger some I/O, and call `throw` or `k` only
later, when the I/O completes.

Due to pervasive use of CPS, there are two useful type aliases defined in
[`Markup_common`][common]:

```ocaml
type 'a cont = 'a -> unit
type 'a cps = exn cont -> 'a cont -> unit
```

With these aliases, the signature of `do_something` can be abbreviated as:

```ocaml
val do_something : int -> string cps
```

which should be much more legible. It might be a [nice easy PR][rename-cps] to
rename alias `'a cont` to `'a callback`.

[rename-cps]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/issues/23

The other important internal type in Markup.ml is the continuation-passing style
stream, or *kstream* (`k` being the traditional meta-variable for a
continuation). The fundamental operation on a stream is getting the next
element, and for kstreams this looks like:

```ocaml
Kstream.next : 'a Kstream.t -> exn cont -> unit cont -> 'a cont -> unit
```

The way this works is that when you call `next stream on_exn on_empty k`, `next`
eventually calls:

- `on_exn exn` if trying to retrieve the next element resulted in exception
  `exn`,
- `on_empty ()` if the stream ended, or
- `k v` in the remaining case, when the stream has a next value, where we are
  calling that value `v`.

Most of Markup.ml is composed as a big chain of stream processors, tied together
by these kstreams. For example, each parser

- takes a stream of bytes,
- transforms it into a stream of Unicode characters paired with locations,
- transforms that into a stream of language tokens, like an "open tag,"
- and transforms that into a stream of parsing signals, like "the start of an
  element."

<br/>

The synchronous default API of Markup.ml, seen in the [`README`][readme], is a
thin wrapper over this internal implementation, which simply expects each call
to a CPS function to call its continuations (callbacks) *before* the function
returns.

Likewise, the Lwt API is another thin wrapper, which translates between CPS and
Lwt promises.

[readme]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml#readme

<br/>

<a id="structure"></a>
### Structure

As for how the stream processors are chained together, The HTML specification
strongly suggests a structure for the parser in the section
[*8.2.1 Overview of the parsing model*][model], from where the following diagram
is ripped without any shame whatsoever:

<p align="center">
<img src="https://www.w3.org/TR/html5/images/parsing-model-overview.svg" />
</p>

[model]: https://www.w3.org/TR/html5/syntax.html#overview-of-the-parsing-model

The XML parser follows the same structure, even though it is not explicitly
suggested by the XML specification.

The modules can be arranged in the following categories. Where a module directly
implements a box from the diagram, it is indicated in boldface.

Until the modules dealing with Lwt, only `Markup_stream_io` does I/O. The rest
of the modules are pure with respect to I/O.

Almost everything is based directly on specifications. Most functions are
commented with the HTML or XML specification section number they are
implementing. It may also be useful to see the [conformance status][conformance]
– these are all the known deviations by Markup.ml from the specifications.

#### Helpers

- [`Markup_common`][common] – shared definitions, compiler compatibility, etc.
- [`Markup_error`][error] – parsing and serialization error type. Markup.ml does
  not throw exceptions, because all errors are recoverable.
- [`Markup.namespace`][namespace] – namespace URI to prefix conversion and back.
- [`Markup_entities`][entities] – checked-in auto-generated HTML5 entity list.
  The source for this file is `src/entities.json`, and the generator is
  `src/translate_entities.ml`. Neither of these latter two files is part of the
  built Markup.ml, nor of the build process.
- [`Markup_trie`][trie] – trie for incrementally searching the entity list.
- [`Markup_kstream`][kstream] – above-mentioned CPS streams.
- [`Markup_text`][text] – some utilities for `Markup_html_tokenizer` and
  `Markup_xml_tokenizer`; see below.

#### I/O

- [`Markup_stream_io`][stream_io] – make byte streams from files, strings, etc.,
  write byte streams to strings, etc. – the first stage of parsing and the last
  stage of serialization (**Network** in the diagram). This uses the I/O
  functions in `Pervasives`.

#### Encodings

- [`Markup_encoding`][encoding] – byte streams to Unicode character streams
  (**Byte Stream Decoder** in the diagram). For UTF-8, this is a wrapper around
  `uutf`.
- [`Markup_detect`][detect] – prescans byte streams to detect encodings.
- [`Markup_input`][input] – Unicode streams to "preprocessed" Unicode streams –
  in HTML5 parlance, this just means normalizing CR-LF to CR, and attaching
  locations (**Input Stream Preprocessor** in the diagram).

#### HTML parsing

- [`Markup_html_tokenizer`][html_tokenizer] – preprocessed Unicode streams to
  HTML lexeme streams (**Tokenizer** in the diagram). HTML lexemes are things
  like start tags, end tags, and runs of text.
- [`Markup_html_parser`][html_parser] – HTML lexeme streams to HTML signal
  streams (**Tree Construction** in the diagram). Signal streams are things like
  "start an element," "start another element as its child," "now end the child,"
  "now end the root element." They are basically a left-to-right traversal of a
  DOM tree, without the DOM tree actually being in memory.

#### XML parsing

- [`Markup_xml_tokenizer`][xml_tokenizer] – as for HTML above, but for XML.
- [`Markup_xml_parser`][xml_parser] - as for HTML above, but for XML.

#### HTML writing

- [`Markup_html_writer`][html_writer] – HTML signal streams back to
  UTF-8-encoded byte streams.

#### XML writing

- [`Markup_xml_writer`][xml_writer] - as for HTML above, but for XML.

#### User-friendly APIs

- [`Markup_utility`][utility] – convenience functions on signal streams for the
  user.
- [`Markup`][main], [`Markup_lwt`][lwt], [`Markup_lwt_unix`][lwt_unix] – the
  public interface for operating all of the above machinery without having to
  touch CPS.

[common]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_common.ml
[error]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_error.ml
[namespace]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_namespace.mli
[entities]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_entities.ml
[trie]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_trie.ml
[kstream]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_kstream.mli
[stream_io]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_stream_io.ml
[encoding]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_encoding.ml
[input]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_input.mli
[html_tokenizer]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_html_tokenizer.mli
[html_parser]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_html_parser.mli
[html_writer]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_html_writer.mli
[xml_tokenizer]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_xml_tokenizer.mli
[xml_parser]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup__xml_parser.mli
[xml_writer]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_xml_writer.mli
[text]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_text.ml
[detect]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_detect.mli
[utility]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_utility.ml
[main]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup.mli
[lwt]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_lwt.mli
[lwt_unix]: https://github.com/aantron/markup.ml/blob/master/src/markup_lwt_unix.mli
[conformance]: http://aantron.github.io/markup.ml/#2_Conformancestatus
